# Software Development Plan

## Phase 0: Requirements Analysis (tag name `5.1-analyzed`)
*(20% of your effort)*

**Important - do not change the code in this phase**

Deliver:

*   [x] Re-write the instructions in your own words.
    *   If you don't do this, you won't know what you're supposed to do!
    *   Don't leave out details!
*   [x] Explain the problem this program aims to solve.
    *   Describe what a *good* solution looks like.
    *   List what you already know how to do.
    *   Point out any challenges that you can foresee.
*   [x] List all of the data that is used by the program, making note of where it comes from.
    *   Explain what form the output will take.
*   [x] List the algorithms that will be used (but don't write them yet).
*   [x] Tag the last commit in this phase `analyzed`
    *   *Grace Points: if this tag is pushed by midnight on the Sunday before the due date, you will receive up to 5 points back*

The overarching goal of this assignment is to continue the project from Assignment 5, but in an object-oriented design 
that is easily modifiable and easier to test or extend. While the base of the project is used, new documentation, SDP, 
user manuals and UML diagrams will be needed for this assignment. There are quite a few different sections. The Requirements
document goes over the sections, so I'll split up my breakdown by each of those sections as well:


### Documentation:
* New UML, user's manual and SDP, all while using new 5.1 tags to keep things straight. The program also will no longer
give usage messages, instead the user's manual should explain how to do everything-aka, it's going to get longer. 

### Unit Tests:
* Like the last section there needs to be 8 solid, "non-trivial" unit tests that follow the quality guidelines.

### Fractal Classes:
* An initial Fractal class is needed that is abstract with 4 concrete subclasses
* Its purpose is to be the 'common structure' for the concrete classes though inheritance
* This also has a placeholder 'count()' method for an exception until it's changed by other classes
* I can define data members in the Fractal class as well as defining other methods as I see fit
* Two of the concrete classes need to be new patterns (based off of the patterns from Phoenix and Mandelbrot)
* The Fractal class is not related to the Palettes or the Colors classes

### Fractal Factory:
* A new class or module that is responsible for the concrete fractal objects
* This module or class needs to have a default for a fractal configuration if none are given
* If a fractal is missing or has issues, let 'open()' handle the failure message

### FractalParser:
* Another new class or module that reads the '.frac' files and turns them into usable information for the program
* Handle the file one line at a time, removing things like case as you go to make it into a key/value pair dictionary
* Be careful on converting strings to their correct type (int or float using the appropriate conversion), code is provided

### Palette Classes:
* An abstract class with two concrete subclasses that has the common structure for the concrete classes, it does not make 
Palette objects though, instead it uses inheritance 
* The concrete subclasses inherit from Palette and have their own 'getColor()' implementations
  * This is where the new color palettes will come into play allowing for palettes between 64 and 512 iterations
* This is where we need to use the 'colour' module along with 'Color.range_to()' for the color palettes.
  * Careful on the palettes to ensure a large enough difference between colors to avoid it being washed out

### PaletteFactory:
* A class or module that follows the 'Factory Method Pattern' that 'instantiate objects embodying palettes'
  * It returns a concrete palette object
* This is the only place where Palette classes are imported
* Without a specified palette, a default palette should be used (defined here, not in main.py))

### ImagePainter:
* A class where 'tkinter' is imported and used (the only place!) that employs the 'Strategy Design Pattern' when calling
the '.count()' method
* The constructor uses 'FractalFactory', 'PaletteFactory' and 'FractalParser' as input

### User Interface:
* The user interface will be mostly the same as last time, but it will not show a list of all the fractals when one is 
not given
* Both the 'FRACTAL_FILE' and the 'PALETTE_NAME' inputs are optional with defaults when they are missing
  * No usage message is printed if a default is used, this information should be in the user manual instead
* The same style as Assignment 5 is used for the file naming

### Default Fractal:
* The max size is 640x640 and the min size is 256x256 with an iteration count between 64 and 256
* It should be one of the 'fascinating' fractal designs, not a 'boring' one
* The default configuration SHOULD be hard coded into the program, not an external .frac file

### Fractal Configuration File Format:
* The fractal configurations need to follow the examples from the other .frac files, pretty much the opposite of the 
'invalid.frac' file
* Lines starting with a '#' and all white spaces are ignored as well as the ordering of configuration items doesn't matter

* These are all valid items in the fractal configuration files:
  * 'type' (string)
    * Figures out which fractal formula to use
  * 'centerX' (float)
    * Center on the x-axis
  * 'centerY' (float)
    * Center on the y-axis
  * 'AxisLength' (float)
    * Size of the complex plane
      * A small value makes for a more zoomed-in image, larger value makes for a more zoomed-out image
  * 'pixels' (int)
    * The width/height of the image 
  * 'iterations' (int)
    * The amount of iterations for the for loop before going to black for the color (larger will take more time)

* These are optional:
  * 'creal' and 'cimag' (float) 
    * The real and imaginary components of the 'C' constant for the Julia formula

### Abstract Classes Library:
* There is the 'abc' library, but it's not needed on this assignment and can add more complexity than it's worth

Another part of the assignment is creating four concrete subclasses of Fractal, two of which are the Mandelbrot and the 
Phoenix fractals. The other two can be one of the given fractal formulae or the use of a "Higher powers" version of a 
Mandelbrot or Julia fractal, but that can only be used for one of the four. 

In the end of the project the program should still run at about the same speed, but with more functionality, better error 
handling and built-in defaults when prompts are missing. The input in this case will be a mix of user input for the type 
of fractal and the color palette used. There will be the external .frac files that are also used. Good input should lead
to the correct fractal being generated in a reasonable amount of time while bad input should produce a helpful error
message (or in the case of missing input, a default fractal should be shown). In the case of an error being thrown, the 
user manual should have instructions on how to continue or how to fix the issue in the future. 



## Phase 1: Design (tag name `5.1-designed`)
*(30% of your effort)*

**Important - do not change the code in this phase**

Deliver:

* [x] Function signatures that include:
    *   Descriptive names.
    *   Parameter lists.
    *   Documentation strings that explain its purpose and types of inputs and outputs.
* [x] Pseudocode that captures how each function works.
    *   Pseudocode != source code.  Do not paste your finished source code into this part of the plan.
* Explain what happens in the face of good and bad input.
    *   Write a few specific examples that occur to you, and use them later when testing
* [x] Tag the last commit in this phase `designed`
    * *Grace Points: if this tag is pushed by midnight on the Sunday before the due date, you will receive up to 5 points back*

For this section I am going to give Chat-GPT another attempt at writing the pseudocode and put it here:


DarkPalette(Palette):

Initialize a palette for a given size with black and white colors and a list of colors in between.
getColor(n): returns the color at the nth position in the list of colors in the palette.
Fractal:

Initialize a fractal with a maximum number of iterations.
count(complex_number): Raise a NotImplementedError exception, concrete subclass of Fractal must implement count() method.
make_fractal(fractal_info):

Create a fractal object based on the input parameters (max_iterations and type) specified in fractal_info.
Return the created fractal object.
get_frac_dic(file_name):

Define a dictionary of parameters required to create a fractal image.
Open and read a fractal configuration file.
Parse the parameters in the configuration file and store them in a dictionary.
Validate the parameters and create a final dictionary of fractal parameters.
safe_convert(obj, new_type):

Safely convert an object into a new type.
Return a new object of the new_type or None if the conversion is not possible.
ImagePainter:

Initialize an object to paint a fractal image on a Tkinter PhotoImage canvas.

paint(): Paint the fractal image on the canvas and display it on the screen.

progress(rows): Print a progress bar to the console to show the progress of image painting.

Palette:

Initialize a palette with a given size.
getColor(n): raise a NotImplementedError exception, concrete subclass of Palette must implement getColor() method.
Mandelbrot(Fractal):

Initialize a Mandelbrot fractal object with a maximum number of iterations.
count(complex_number): Return the iteration count of the Mandelbrot set for a point at the complex_number.
Mandelbrot3(Fractal):

Initialize a Mandelbrot^3 fractal object with a maximum number of iterations.
count(complex_number): Return the iteration count of the Mandelbrot^3 set for a point at the complex_number.
makePalette(palette_name, size):

Create a palette object based on the input parameters (palette_name and size).
Return the created palette object.
Phoenix(Fractal):

Initialize a Phoenix fractal object with a maximum number of iterations, and complex numbers 'c' and 'p'.
count(complex_number): Return the iteration count of the Phoenix set for a point at 'z'.


## Phase 2: Implementation (tag name `5.1-implemented`)
*(15% of your effort)*

**Finally, you can write code!**

Deliver:

*   [x] More or less working code.
*   [x] Note any relevant and interesting events that happened while you wrote the code.
    *   e.g. things you learned, things that didn't go according to plan
*   [x] Tag the last commit in this phase `implemented`

I have the code up and working. One of my bigger obstacles has been getting the color palette to work with different sizes,
I kept having off by 1 errors, after tweaking it a bit I got a better way to do it. I was doing regular division and with 
certain numbers the rounding was breaking things. 

I wish I had sketched out a diagram better to get things better understood from the get go. 

I had to redo my FractalParser class two or three times until I ended up with the dictionary route, not sure why it was 
such a pain, but I got it working. 

## Phase 3: Testing and Debugging (tag name `5.1-tested`)
*(30% of your effort)*

Deliver:

* [x] A set of test cases that you have personally run on your computer.
    *   Include a description of what happened for each test case.
    *   For any bugs discovered, describe their cause and remedy.
    *   Write your test cases in plain language such that a non-coder could run them and replicate your experience.
* [x] Tag the last commit in this phase `tested`

* "test_get_frac_dic_of_phoenix" tests to see if the fractal info dictionary is being correctly set up
and getting the right values.
* "test_get_frac_dic_of_julia" tests to see if the Julia fractals, with their values are also correctly used in the 
dictionary
* "test_get_frac_dic_of_mandelbrot3" tests another type of fractal, checking different parts of the fractal info than 
the other test cases
* "test_minxy_maxxy" a very handy test to make sure that I was correctly calculating the minx, miny, maxx, maxy from
the imaginary numbers in the fractal info
* "test_pixel_size" tests to make sure that the 'pixelsize' is correctly calculated for the fractals
* "test_duck_typing" does the testing on duck typing by checking the type of the fractal vs it's parent class
* "test_count" tests to ensure that the math is done right with the complex numbers 
* "test_palette_creation" tests to ensure that the right size of palette is being made, which helped me catch some errors
during my testing phase

I was able to figure out some of my errors though building my unit tests. Mainly a palette that was getting made one unit
short, but I was able to get it fixed. 

## Phase 4: Deployment (tag name `5.1-deployed`)
*(5% of your effort)*

Deliver:

*   [x] Tag the last commit in this phase `deployed`
*   [x] Your repository is pushed to GitLab.
*   [x] **Verify** that your final commit was received by browsing to its project page on GitLab.
    *   Ensure the project's URL is correct.
    *   Review the project to ensure that all required files are present and in correct locations.
    *   Check that unwanted files have not been included.
    *   Make any final touches to documentation, including the Sprint Signature and this Plan.
*   [x] **Validate** that your submission is complete and correct by cloning it to a new location on your computer and re-running it.
	*	Run your program from the command line so you can see how it will behave when your grader runs it.  **Running it in PyCharm is not good enough!**
    *   Run through your test cases to avoid nasty surprises.
    *   Check that your documentation files are all present.

I will be pushing this and then cloning it to verify the submission just like a grader would do. If the tests and program
is running in both the shell and in PyCharm things are probably good to go. 

## Phase 5: Maintenance

Spend a few minutes writing thoughtful answers to these questions.  They are meant to make you think about the long-term consequences of choices you made in this project.

Deliver:

*   [ ] Write brief and honest answers to these questions:
    *   What parts of your program are sloppily written and hard to understand?
        *   Are there parts of your program which you aren't quite sure how/why they work?
        *   If a bug is reported in a few months, how long would it take you to find the cause?
    *   Will your documentation make sense to...
        *   ...anybody besides yourself?
        *   ...yourself in six month's time?
    *   How easy will it be to add a new feature to this program in a year?
    *   Will your program continue to work after upgrading...
        *   ...your computer's hardware?
        *   ...the operating system?
        *   ...to the next version of Python?
*   [ ] Make one final commit and push your **completed** Software Development Plan to GitLab.
*   [ ] Respond to the **Assignment Reflection Survey** on Canvas.
